[Music]
first up the orange juices then a fresh
super fruit smoothie twice the price but
no more antioxidants next two brands of
smoothie specifically marketed for our
antioxidants still no better finally a
superfood smoothie a whopping three
times the antioxidant power of any of
the others so what's going on
antioxidants might have an air of
mystery about them but if you look at
the label on the side of one of these
drinks it's clear that most of the
antioxidant effect is just coming from
plain old vitamin C fishman C is
actually a powerful antioxidant it's
found naturally in most fruit and veg
but is also a common additive to stop
juice going Brown there's nothing
special about fruits themselves in these
drinks so my next question is do the
antioxidants in these drinks actually do
anything inside our bodies to find out
we recruited ten volunteers to do an
experiment never attempted before under
the guidance of dr. Kirsten Brandt they
all drank 360 mils of smoothie we
measured the antioxidant status of each
person's blood beforehand so we have a
baseline and then regularly over the
next 24 hours
did the smoothie give them an
antioxidant boost well at first the
antioxidant levels in their blood did go
up only to plummet dramatically after
four to five hours and they even went
well below baseline and only just coming
back to baseline after 24 hours
Kirsten was not surprised by the sudden
drop to below baseline as our bodies
actually work to keep everything in
perfect balance including antioxidant
level
this balance where the body will keep
the level constant it's called
homeostasis and it's the same for our
temperature for our sugar levels for
everything else in the body that should
have a correct level our body's
continually produce their own
antioxidants when we take in a big extra
dose our body's slowed down their
production to get back to the optimum
level but what Kirsten had not expected
was that it would take so long for
almost a day after drinking just a big
glass of smoothie or juice
our volunteers blood contains less
antioxidant power than normal it's the
opposite effect from what most of us
would expect and lower antioxidant
levels presumably mean more free
radicals in our bodies but Kirsten
thinks the messages we get from the
adverts are even more misleading as free
radicals are not such a bad thing so it
isn't the case that all of us have got
our bodies full of bad free radicals and
the more we sloshed the smoothie in the
more they're going to mop up those bad
things in our body no normal healthy
people have exactly their free radicals
than they need free radicals are
actually quite important for example
they are one of the signal molecules
that tells the cells in our body when
you need to repair for example muscle
fibers so if you want to go to the gym
and do some training if it wasn't for
the free radicals new muscles wouldn't
grow
the science and the marketing of poles
apart your body makes exactly the
antioxidants it needs and taking in a
big dose merely throws it out of balance
[Music]
you